# Semantics for `message/rfc822` notifications {#rfc822-semantics}

The `multipart/digest` multipart media-type ({{RFC2046, Section 5.1.5}}) uses `message/rfc822` media-type ({{RFC2046, Section 5.2.1}}, {{RFC822}}) for body parts as default. It follows that the {{&protocol}} transmits notifications as `message/rfc822`, unless the application client requests otherwise.

## Request {#rfc822-request}

An application clients MAY specify additional parameters to `message/rfc822` notification media-type in the `accept` event field associated with the `PREP` list item in the =Accept-Events= header field of the request.

## Notification {#rfc822-notification}

A resource server implementing the {{&protocol}} SHOULD send a notification to an application client when a request with one of the following methods generates a response with any of the following status codes:

| Request Method                     | Response Status                                  |
|-
| `PUT` ({{HTTP, Section 9.3.4}})    | `200 (OK)` ({{HTTP, Section 15.3.1}})            |
| `PATCH` ({{RFC5789}})              | `204 (No Content)` ({{HTTP, Section 15.3.5}})    |
| `DELETE` ({{HTTP, Section 9.3.5}}) |
|
|-
| `POST` ({{HTTP, Section 9.3.3}})   | `200 (OK)` ({{HTTP, Section 15.3.1}})            |
|                                    | `204 (No Content)` ({{HTTP, Section 15.3.5}})    |
|                                    | `201 (Created)` ({{HTTP, Section 15.3.2}})       |
|                                    | `205 (Reset Content)` ({{HTTP, Section 15.3.6}}) |
{: title="Notification Triggers" #notification-triggers}

The notification MUST NOT be sent before the success response has been sent to the user agent that initiated the request.

## Headers {#rfc822-headers}

A resource server MUST include the following header fields in a `message/rfc822` formatted PREP notification:

`Method`
: identical to `:method` pseudo-header field in a HTTP/2 request ({{-HTTP2, Section 8.3.1}}), that specifies the request method that triggered the notification.

`Date`
: identical to `Date` header field in a HTTP response ({{HTTP, Section 6.6.1}}), that specifies date and time at which the event that triggered the notification was completed.

`Event-ID`
: an opaque identifier for the generated notification.


A resource server SHOULD include the following headers in a `message/rfc822` formatted PREP notification when the state of the resource or its representation is modified as a result of the event:

`ETag`
: identical to `ETag` header field ({{HTTP, Section 8.8.3}}) in a HTTP response, that is an opaque identifier for the current representation of the state of the resource.

~~~ http-message
--random-boundary  <- From the Previous Message (do not include)
                   <- Empty part response headers & blank line
Method: PUT
Date: Sat, 1 April 2023 10:11:12 GMT
Event-ID: 1234
ETag: "abc123"
--random-boundary
~~~
{: sourcecode-name="rfc822-PUT-notification-example.http" #rfc822-PUT title="`PUT` notification message"}

A resource server MUST include the following headers in a `message/rfc822` formatted PREP notification when sent as a result of a `POST` request that modifies another resource:

`Content-Location`
: identical to the `Content-Location` header field ({{HTTP, Section 8.7}}).

~~~ http-message
--random-boundary  <- From the Previous Message (do not include)
                   <- Empty part response headers & blank line
Method: POST
Date: Sat, 1 April 2023 10:12:14 GMT
Event-ID: 1235
Content-Location: /foo
--random-boundary
~~~
{: sourcecode-name="rfc822-POST-notification-example.http" #rfc822-POST title="`POST` notification message"}


*[delta representation]: (((delta representation)))
*[delta representations]: (((delta representation)))

## Body {#rfc822-body}

The body of a `message/rfc822` formatted PREP notification might be used to provide a (((!delta representation)))delta{{&nbsp}}representation, the difference between the state of the representation before and after the most recent event on the resource.

If the application client does not specify `delta` parameter associated with a preferred notifications format of `message/rfc822` in the `accept` event field of the [{{&zwsp}}request](#request) that results in `message/rfc822` formatted PREP notifications, the notifications MUST NOT contain a body.

If state of the resource is not modified as a result of an HTTP operation, the resulting notification MUST NOT contain a body.

If the application client specifies a `delta` parameter associated with a preferred notifications format of `message/rfc822` in the `accept` event field of the [{{&zwsp}}request](#request) that results in `message/rfc822` formatted PREP notifications, a resource server:

+ SHOULD send the delta representation as the body of the notification generated upon a `PATCH` ({{RFC5789}}) operation.
+ MAY send the delta representation as the body of the notification generated upon a `PUT` ({{HTTP, Section 9.3.4}}) or a `POST` ({{HTTP, Section 9.3.3}}) operation.

A resource server SHOULD send the delta representation in the content-type preferred by the client as specified by the `delta` parameter.

<!--
  If a `delta` parameter is not set in the `content-type` event field for the [[#notifications-response]], resource servers MUST provide a `Content-Type` header in each notification.
-->

~~~ http-message
--random-boundary  <- From the Previous Message (do not include)
                   <- Empty part response headers & blank line
Method: PATCH
Date: Sat, 1 April 2023 10:14:16 GMT
Event-ID: 1236
ETag: "xyz987"
Content-type: application/example

<delta>
--random-boundary
~~~
{: sourcecode-name="rfc822-PATCH-notification-with-delta-example.http" #rfc822-PATCH-delta title="`PATCH` notification with delta representation"}
